The Bible contains many fundamental principles that a Christian can use every day to guide his life.
For example, at Proverbs chapter 13 verse 20,
we're told that if we walk with wise persons, we will become wise.
Proverbs 28 states that if we're faithful, we will receive many blessings.
Luckily, you have Bible principles that you live by as well.
However, as it pertains to pursuing peace, there is one essential principle that must be followed.
Let's find out what it is.
Turn with me please to Galatians chapter 6.
And let's read the words of Galatians chapter 6 verses 7 and 8.
Here we read,
Do not be misled.
God is not one to be mocked.
For whatever a person is sewing, this he will also reap.
Because the one sewing with a view to his flesh will reap corruption from his flesh.
But the one sewing with a view to the spirit will reap everlasting life from the spirit.
So the principle,
We reap what we sow.
You might think of a farmer.
He knows that he must plant what he hopes to reap.
He also knows that he will not reap fruitage right away.
But he trusts that results will come in due time.
It's similar with the quality of peace.
The only way for us to reap peace is to sow it.
And as we put in the work to achieve it, we trust that in due time, we will reap the benefits.
In this symposium, we will consider viable and modern day accounts of how Jehovah's people,
despite particular challenges, have reaped peace after first sewing it.
Now one particular challenge to gaining peace is problems within the family.
Because of imperfection, it's not uncommon to have disagreements, even tension from time to time.
And family members may hurt one another in various ways.
And usually such offenses are minor.
And peace can quickly be sewn and reaped.
But what if the offense is more serious?
A family member says or does something that hurts us deeply.
Well, even then, it still may be possible to sow and reap peace.
We can prove this by considering the Bible account of Joseph and his brothers.
And we're familiar with the story.
Out of envy, Joseph's brothers sold him into slavery.
And this was by no means a minor offense.
It began with Joseph being led to Egypt.
Sometime later, he was falsely accused and thrown into prison.
So for 13 years, Joseph suffered this treatment when he had done nothing to deserve it.
Now it could have been very easy for Joseph to feel that if he ever saw his brothers again,
the best option for peace would be not to have any dealings with them at all.
Perhaps we might feel the same way as well.
But Joseph didn't do that.
In fact, after some years passed, both Joseph and his brothers sold peace.
Now note how this was done.
Turn with me please to the 105th Psalm.
And note the 19th verse of Psalm 105.
It says until the time that his word proved true,
the saying of Jehovah is what refined him.
Joseph trusted in Jehovah to refine him.
To shape his thinking and godly qualities, he refused to become bitter.
In fact, how interesting it is to note that there is nothing in the scriptures to indicate
that Joseph ever told anyone, not even Pharaoh,
that his brothers were the ones who kidnapped him and sold him as a slave.
And how about Joseph's brothers?
Years after they had mistreated him, they met Joseph in Egypt.
When Joseph tested them by giving the youngest brother Benjamin significantly more attention
than he gave the others, he saw his brothers had changed.
They had like goal of envy.
They showed genuine concern for their brother and for their father Jacob.
Joseph realized that his brothers were repentant and he forgave them.
And because Joseph and his brothers were willing to take steps to sow peace,
they reaped the benefits and eventually were able to enjoy a harmonious relationship.
Well, how can the example of Joseph and his brothers help us today?
In the following dramatization, notice how a family member sows peace.
Every morning, and I mean every morning, there's Jeremy singing at the top of his lungs.
Okay, I wasn't the only one.
No, but you were the loudest.
Spoken like a true big brother.
I was always impressed with how close you two were.
Well, it wasn't always that way.
No.
I mean, it started out that way.
Nick and I, we weren't just brothers.
We were friends.
But then the family business ran into trouble.
And what started as a small disagreement just exploded.
How are business works?
Instead of criticizing, could you just once?
Jeremy!
Do you have any idea what this is going to cost us?
I didn't have a choice. You went behind my back. What's your problem?
You, you're the problem.
We tried to work it out.
But things just got worse.
It was like a door slam shut between us.
On the outside, I acted like everything was fine.
But inside, I couldn't let it go.
I felt like a total hypocrite, and that had to change.
I needed a lot of help from Jehovah to let go, to move on,
and make things right with Nick.
It took a long time for the wounds to heal.
And for us to trust each other, the way we used to.
But we did. I'm so grateful that we made peace before the world turned upside down.
So how can you and I imitate Joseph and his brothers?
Let's discuss three steps.
The first step is found in Ephesians chapter 4, verse 32.
Let's read that.
Ephesians 4, verse 32.
But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another,
just as God also by Christ freely forgave you.
So first, we must be ready to forgive.
If we let grievances and resentment build up and develop in our hearts,
it becomes even more difficult to be forgiving.
Did you note in the video what started as a small disagreement between Nick and Jeremy
exploded into something much bigger? Why?
Jeremy could not let go of his resentment towards his brother.
We must work to treat others in a forgiving way,
just as Jehovah treats us.
The second step, don't dwell on the offense.
Proverbs 17 and 9 says,
The one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.
And isn't that how Jeremy described the relationship with his brother?
It was a door slam shut between them.
It wasn't until steps were taken to so peace,
having that open, honest communication with each other,
spending time together, working with each other in the ministry.
Only then did things start to improve.
And did you notice?
Everything did not go back to normal right away.
It took time to read peace.
Time for those wounds to heal.
Time to regain lost trust,
so we can't look for miracles.
But we should look for progress.
Like the farmer, trust that.
In new time, we will see results from our efforts.
And here's where the all-important third step comes in.
Ask Jehovah in prayer to help us to let go of resentment.
Remember Psalm 105, 19?
It was the sayings of Jehovah that helped refine Joseph
to develop the qualities needed not to become bitter
and to let go of any resentment.
In the video, Jeremy acknowledged that he needed Jehovah's help,
to let go and to move on.
And Jehovah can do the same for us.
It's not easy when we go through situations
that threaten the peace of our family.
But if we live by this fundamental principle,
we reap what we sow,
then we can be assured that with the forgiving spirit,
looking for opportunities to sow peace,
and be seeking Jehovah for his help,
that our efforts will be blessed.
And in due time, we and our family
will now present the next talk of this symposium,
how they sowed and reaped peace.
They give you a nice.